Statement of Engel Lab Expectations
Updated February 4, 2025

Commitments to my trainees:

1.	I will ensure incoming lab members are aware of this document and of what will be expected of them/what they can expect.
2.	You can expect 1:1 meeting time with me roughly weekly during the semester and by appointment in the summer. Drop-ins and brief questions are welcome, too: if my door is open, come in. I will also strive to answer e-mails within 24 hours during the work week. Please send a reminder email if I fail to meet this target! 
3.	I will use my professional network to help you. I will not be able to provide 100% of the training and support you require throughout your career, so I will introduce you to relevant people in your field and to other potential mentors via email or at meetings. I will also help you acquire skills for managing these networking interactions: preparing your “elevator pitch”, asking good questions, etc.
4.	I will take an active role in helping you be intentional about your degree, your career, and ultimately your life. All trainees will fill out an Individual Development Plan (IDP) tailored to their career stage when they first join the group. We will meet to review and update this document annually, discussing career interests, progress, and identifying concrete plans to fill skill gaps. We will have a final exit interview to reflect on the IDP and our time together. 
5.	I will help you hone your scientific writing through publications, theses, and/or grant proposals. I will provide detailed, timely feedback on your writing: you can expect a 1–2-week turnaround on samples you send me unless it’s a very long or complex document.
6.	I will happily write reference letters for you. The first time you ask me for one, please give me 2-4 weeks’ notice as I need to find a 2–3-hour block of time to craft a good letter. For subsequent requests, I will tailor the existing letter, so 1 week notice will suffice.  
7.	I will help you develop all-important communication and presentation skills through opportunities to give presentations at weekly group meetings. I will also alert you to opportunities to present at local (under)graduate research symposia and at conferences:	
a.	MSc students can expect to go to at least 1 domestic conference during their final year. Travel to the US for a conference is a possibility but will depend on funding available at the time.
b.	PhD students can expect to go to at least 2 conferences or workshops during their tenure. 
8.	You can expect me to give my honest feedback and to ask for, and work on implementing, yours. I want to improve as a mentor!
9.	You can expect me to help you find funding sources, ranging from research grants to teaching opportunities, and to help you with the application process.
10.	You can expect me to ensure that you have a safe and supportive working environment. If you have any concerns about the climate in the lab or lab personnel (including myself), I want to know as soon as possible. In this context, it’s important to know that, as a faculty member, I am a mandatory reporter, which means I must report any instances of harassment or abuse. All information remains confidential unless you choose to release it. If you don’t feel comfortable coming to me with an issue, you can access student ombudsperson resources here.
11.	I will take an active role in shaping your research and setting you up for scientific success. You can expect me to read and discuss any relevant literature you send me and to send you relevant literature to read.
a.	For Undergraduate students: in consultation with you, I will provide the project design and ensure it’s feasible on your timeframe. Your main task will be execution, not research design.
b.	For MSc students: in consultation with you, I will guide your project design and make every effort to help you publish your results. 
c.	For PhD students: I will work with you to craft a fruitful initial direction for your research but will expect original ideation from you as your studies progress.
12.	You can expect me to give you opportunities to practice your final oral presentation (defense) and to give you feedback. 
13.	You can expect me to collaborate with you in deciding which courses to take as part of your program.

Expectations of trainees:
1.	I expect you to follow responsible etiquette when using the lab’s high performance computing (HPC) resources.  
2.	I expect you to be reflective, thoughtfully complete an Individual Development Plan (IDP) annually, and to be intentional about our time together during your program.
3.	Let me know as far as possible in advance if you need a reference letter (at least 2 weeks in advance if it’s the first time I’m writing you one and 1 week otherwise).
4.	Make every effort to attend weekly lab meetings and let me know in advance if you’ll be absent. Present regularly at these meetings, either sharing your recent results/what you’re working on or discussing a paper. I also expect that you’ll attend relevant seminars I alert you to – these will include seminars put on by the Center for Molecular Simulation. 
5.	While traveling, do your best to be economical about booking flights and hotels (i.e. don’t leave flight booking to the last minute so it’s insanely expensive, don’t eat at a 3-Michelin-starred restaurant, etc.). I have limited resources that I need to make work for everyone in the group!
6.	I expect you to work roughly 35-40 hours/week (though working in “fits and spurts” is natural and expected when, for example, a deadline is approaching or just after one has passed) but I do not expect you to work evenings and weekends (unless you want to). You are free to define your own working hours and to work in a hybrid format (i.e. some days on campus and some at home/coffee shop), but I expect you to be in the office 1-2 times per week. I am open to having 1:1 Zoom meetings and I will allow you to join the occasional group meeting remotely, but I prefer our group meetings to be in person. If I email you on a weekend, I don’t expect a response until Monday. I expect you to take reasonable vacations to unplug and fully recharge! You are entitled to at least 2 weeks of vacation. I do ask that you alert me of your vacation plans in advance.
7.	Please send any pieces of writing you want feedback on 1-2 weeks in advance of any deadline so I can get it back to you with enough time for you to incorporate suggestions.
8.	I expect that you will pursue research that has some overlap with my expertise and interests. Otherwise, I will not be in a good position to mentor you. If your interests shift away from the themes of the lab, I expect that you will inform me and we can discuss options, which could include switching to another lab. You should always be open to considering that possibility - it’s your career, and moving to a different lab isn’t a problem (I did this myself during my graduate studies!).
9.	I expect you to be fully engaged in the group. That includes being at lab meetings, participating in those meetings (by presenting, listening, asking questions, etc), coming to lab social events, taking part in at least some of our outreach events, helping to host visiting speakers, etc. I also expect that you will be supportive of each other -- say hello to your labmates, help when they ask (if you can), be welcoming to newcomers, etc.
10.	I expect you will sometimes have to say ‘no’ to the above commitments. This is fine and I don’t expect you to do everything.
11.	I expect that you will discuss issues of authorship of publications, presentations and talks with me before presenting/submitting. Typically, PIs contribute intellectually and monetarily to student projects and are listed as senior authors. However, if a project did not involve my effort in these ways, I would not expect authorship (and in fact if you do side projects that don’t involve me, that’s great, but see #7 above.)
12.	I expect you will actively pursue funds to support your research via graduate teaching assistantships (GATs) and applying for scholarships (e.g. NSERC CGS). Applying for funding is a crucial part of your training as it involves learning how to sell your ideas. Your success in obtaining grants will also be one of the main features (beyond your publications) that any future employers will consider, at least in research-related careers. This does not mean that I won’t help with paying for your research, but it does mean that I need to see that you are putting in reasonable effort to support yourself. Typically, graduate students are expected to take on 1 GAT per semester of XX hours/week unless they have secured a scholarship. 
13.	I expect you to help mentor more junior trainees (e.g. help them with code debugging, send them a relevant paper if you come across it, etc). More senior graduate students will benefit greatly from taking on active undergraduate mentorship; this will not only hone your own understanding and skillset -- it will help you determine whether mentoring is something you enjoy and would like to incorporate in your career.


I’d like to acknowledge Elena Kramer, Stacey Smith, Eden Tanner, and Adam Martin, whose ‘Lab expectations’ documents I drew upon in drafting the above.
